Review from Cosmos Magazine


Reviews (books, DVDs etc)

NON-FICTION
Reviewer:

David Kay
November 2008
The Age of Everything
By Matthew Hedman
Footprint Books
ISBN 978 0 226 32292 6
A$38.95
256 pages
Buy from Amazon
The Age of Everything

In public debate, much noise is sometimes made about the inherent 
uncertainty of scientific conclusions. For decades, creationists have 
bleated about the potential for error using dating methods based upon 
the radioactive decay of carbon-14.

More recently, climate change deniers have used the uncertainty inherent 
in the work of the U.N. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change to 
confuse, and sometimes mislead, the general public.

The Age of Everything provides an explanation of some of the important 
ways that scientists are able to establish the age of objects, from 
archaeological artefacts to the universe itself. Hedman's account of 
carbon-14 dating makes it clear that researchers are usually far more 
aware than their critics of error margins and uncertainties in their 
measurements and methods.

There are numerous potential sources of error using radioactive dating, 
usually because of contamination of samples from outside sources. 
Scientists are aware of these issues and as a result of careful analysis 
they can often provide corrections to otherwise inaccurate results.

Other isotopes besides carbon-14 can also be used for radioactive dating 
including those of potassium, rubidium, magnesium and thorium. Each has 
its own characteristics, which determine the timescale that it can 
acccurately measure and the circumstances in which it can be used.

In biology, the rate of mutation of genetic DNA can be used to estimate 
timescales. As with radioactive dating, there are influences that can 
decrease the accuracy of results obtained with this method. Scientists 
have studied these influences closely and are often able to compensate 
for their effects.

Other methods of dating include measuring the age of stars by 
determining their place in the 'main sequence' that describes the 
evolution of most stars, establishing the age of distant galaxies by 
measuring their electromagnetic redshift and dating the entire universe 
by studying the cosmic microwave background radiation.

The Age of Everything is informative, well written and easy to read. The 
ingenuity of those who have uncovered ways to figure out the age of 
things is clear. This book should be compulsory reading for anyone
wishing to publicly comment on the uncertainties of scientific 
measurements and methods.


