Hi there....

May I ask what prompted this question? It might help me give you a more
complete or specific answer....

You are correct in the "plasma universe" model is a pretty non-standard 
theory of cosmology and has few adherents these days. I would be a little
careful about the word "fringe", though, since not everyone working
on this idea is regarded as crazy. Some treat it as a longshot option
worth checking out.

I will admit that the heyday of this idea was a bit before my time, so
I'm not extremely familiar with this particular model. How much detail 
are you willing to get into here? I can point you to some cosmology
articles on these issues, but they may not be most approachable sources.

The trick with both this model and many of the so-called "alternative
cosmologies" is that we aren't talking a well-defined model that
predicts a number X, so if we measure the number and get something other
than X, we never have to consider the model again. Instead, they are
more general concepts that can be "tweaked" is various ways to deal with
different objections.  Of course, at some level the "hot big bang" is
also in some sense a short-hand for a class of models which predict
slightly different results depending on the exact parameters you assume.

However, what makes the big bang unique at the moment is that there is
one set of big bang model parameters that is both qualitatively and
quantitatively consistent with many of the cosmological
observations to date. Using the same parameters, you can get 
a prediction for the redshifts of light from distant galaxies, 
the structure of the microwave sky, the total mass of clusters, etc.
Furthermore, with these parameters we can make specific quantitative 
predictions for what other observations should show and also which
observations should place tighter constraints on those parameters.
Thus cosmologists can productively treat the big bang as a "default" 
model and look for inconsistencies in an effort to disprove it
or refine it.

By contrast, the plasma universe and other alternative cosmologies are
mostly playing catch-up. Their advocates saying that they can explain
the same phenomena as the big bang model, and while they can sometimes
cook up results that match one observation, they cannot provide a
coherent quantitative account for the variety of cosmological
observations that hang together reasonably well in the big bang picture.
As such, these models usually seem ad-hoc and more importantly, they do
not readily suggest specific or unique avenues for further research.
Thus most cosmologists don't see any point in considering these
alternatives until there is some cosmological data that the big bang
models cannot cope with.

I'm sorry if this sonds a bit like a dodge, but I'm not sure if you
want to really here that plasma universe models cannot explain
the Gunn-Peterson trough in distant quasars, the change in the 
temperature of the CMB with time measured using distant clusters
of galaxies, etc. etc. I am perfectly happy to get into these issues
if you like, however....

mmh
